[THEME MUSIC]
>> This is Book Tours
and I'm Corinne Edwards.
I'd like you to meet two of
the most important messengers
in publishing today.
Important because the
authors on this show
are dedicated to helping
your personal growth,
to make you happier, healthier,
to be the best you can be.
Wisdom Television is
privileged to welcome
rocket scientists
Dr. John Brandenburg
and Monica Rix Paxson, authors
of "Dead Mars, Dying Earth".
Is Mars dead?
And if so, do we care?
Dr. Brandenburg and
Monica Rix Paxson,
authors of "Dead Mars, Dying
Earth" say we'd better,
we are well on our way to
Earth meeting the same fate.
What does Mars have
to do with us, John?
>> Mars is an exhibit of
how this planet could end up
in the future if we don't
take better care of it.
Mars apparently
was a planet that
had a thriving
biosphere in the past.
We don't know the extent
of that biosphere.
We don't know how
far it advanced.
We do know, however, that the
present conditions on Mars
mean that only a small shadow
of that former biosphere
can exist on Mars now.
It appears a large
asteroid struck it.
>> We know Mars once had an
ocean that was larger than
the Pacific, and it
once had an atmosphere,
and it once had life,
and they're all gone.
And this is our nearest neighbor
so it's an important lesson
for our own planet.
>> Now, people are very
fascinated with the idea
of life on other planets.
Do you think that we are pretty
proud in saying that we are
the only life in the universe?
Do you think there is life?
>> I'm convinced that there is
life elsewhere in the universe.
To me, the Earth is a very
typical place in the universe.
We are very lucky
to be here, though.
It's a place where life
can thrive, and in fact,
shapes the environment,
particularly our oxygen
in the atmosphere,
the ozone layer.
So that we would expect it
elsewhere in the universe,
we would find similar planets.
Mars may have, in fact,
been a similar planet
to this one in the past.
>> Which planet do you
think might have life on it?
>> Oh, I think there is
certainly life on Mars now.
>> Now?
>> Just the infamous
primitive bacteria--
>> Really?
>> --that could survive
under the harsh conditions.
They find life in
places they thought
were impossible
for things to live
on Earth, miles
below the surface,
in the center of
nuclear reactors,
in places, deserts in
Antarctica that resemble Mars.
So I think there will be--
they will find that there is
bacterial life on Mars now.
>> But that doesn't
impress people.
Bacterial life, what about
people walking around?
What about these UFO people that
come-- the little blue people?
>> Well, we really are beginning
to look at what the history
of Mars is.
And it may have included
intelligent life of some sort.
It's certainly had a similar
history to the Earth.
It was a warm, wet planet,
life could have evolved there.
And we see some evidence of
some very interesting things
on Mars, things that we
wouldn't have expected to see,
things that look very
geometric, that looked fairly
sculptural or architectural.
>> Pyramids?
>> And pyramids, for example.
And we feel that it's an
important place for us
to continue to explore
and it is an open question
as to how long life was on
Mars and how evolved it became.
>> So what do you think
happened to Mars that killed it?
>> It appears a large
asteroid hit it.
We presented a hypothesis at
several scientific conventions
on the idea of an unstable
greenhouse on Mars
creating Earth-like conditions.
Mars needed a greenhouse to
have Earth-like conditions.
However, Carl Sagan
was the first one
to find out that such
a greenhouse would
have been unstable to like a
large asteroid striking Mars.
That would collapse
the greenhouse.
The greenhouse gas,
carbon dioxide,
would freeze out in the
dry ice on the surface.
The greenhouse would collapse
and not be able to recover.
>> Well, that's how we lost
our dinosaurs, isn't it?
Probably?
>> Exactly.
>> According to the theory.
>> Yeah, it was very similar.
Here on this planet,
we were struck
by an asteroid or a
meteorite in the Chicxulub
region of the Yucatan
65 million years ago.
And it did, it reduced life
greatly on this planet.
We were a large enough planet
and close enough to the Sun
that we eventually recovered.
Mars did not.
>> Is Mars smaller than we are?
>> About half the size.
>> Half the size.
So that if a very
big asteroid hit us,
we could have the
same thing happen?
>> Yes.
Something the size that
wiped out the dinosaurs,
if it struck the planet again,
would certainly cause damage
that we would not be able
to recover from for probably
a million years.
Humanity might
disappear, unless steps
are taken to prevent that.
>> These are important risks.
But you know, we don't
even need a meteorite
to cause problems here on Earth.
>> We're doing it
ourselves, right?
>> We are actually generating
some of the same kinds
of effects that you might have
from that kind of strike with
our own use of fossil fuels
and increasing greenhouse gases
in our own atmosphere.
So we have a problem
and the problem
is we don't have to wait
to be hit by something
to have a problem.
We have a problem
now and we're seeing
some of the results of that
problem just even today.
>> Now, one of the points you
made in your book that was
interesting to me was
that our atmosphere,
which is being destroyed
by the carbon monoxide that
we're generating actually
keeps the asteroids away
and the comets away.
>> Yes.
>> I never knew that.
>> It functions kind of as a
bullet proof vest for a lot
of debris.
>> It deflects it?
>> Yes, it deflects it or
burns up the smaller pieces.
Eventually, though, one is
large enough and it gets through
and we've had--
we have the big meteorite
crater in Arizona.
We have the Tunguska
Event in Siberia,
and several more
recent near misses
that show that this
could happen at any time.
>> So the people who are
sitting back and saying, "Well,
I'm not going to worry
about this stuff.
That's going to happen two
million years from now."
The very fact that we're
destroying this layer leaves us
open for something that we
cannot possibly defend against,
a meteorite or a comet fittings.
>> What we're doing to the
Earth makes it more vulnerable
to the damage that would--
these things would pile
up on top of each other.
>> You know, it's also a
situation where we're evolving
as human beings and we will
continue to evolve provided we
survive.
And we have become space-fearing
people and citizens
of the cosmos, really.
And when you become citizens
of the cosmos, a citizen
of the cosmos, you suddenly
are responsible for your home
world in a way that you've
never perhaps been before.
So suddenly, we have
to prepare and be
aware of our atmosphere, our
oceans, and potential things
that might strike
us from outside.
>> There's a word that
everybody talks about.
And I'd like you to explain
exactly what it means--
global warming.
Let's start from A,
what is global warming?
>> Global warming is the
build-up of CO2 and other gases
that tend to trap
infrared radiation
in the Earth's atmosphere,
above levels that they have been
historically.
Some of this may be some natural
trend that we don't understand,
but however, the dominant effect
for raising the carbon dioxide
level in the Earth's
atmosphere appears
to be human use of fossil
fuels, which gives us
our civilization, our cars, our
televisions, our electricity.
So this build-up
of carbon dioxide
is changing the way the Earth's
environment accepts and rejects
heat.
We have the example of Venus
in our own solar system that
has an overwhelming greenhouse,
and the temperatures
on the surface of Venus are
close to the melting point
of lead.
It's absolutely a hellish
place, and it's much hotter
than it would be if
it had no atmosphere.
Then, of course,
we have the Earth
and we're raising
the level of carbon
dioxide in the atmosphere so
that it will trap more heat.
One of the methods of using
carbon dioxide in industrial
use to make CO2 lasers,
these are infrared lasers.
They're very powerful.
They're used for cutting
thick pieces of steel.
Infrared radiation and carbon
dioxide love each other.
And when you raise that, change
that level in the Earth's
atmosphere, you affect
how it processes heat,
just like changing the
thermostat on your house
and your living room.
>> So coming back to it,
let's talk about the Midwest
of Chicago because we're taping
this in Chicago, Midwest area.
We had in February, almost
80-degree weather here.
Well, and two
summers ago, we had
heat of 121 degrees Fahrenheit.
Is this because of
this global warming?
Is this what causing it?
>> I hate to say it, but global
warming is not going to mean
just a gradual raising
of temperatures.
It's going to be
killer heat waves.
>> Wait a minute, this is really
serious and we want to hear
more about this.
We're talking to John
Brandenburg and Monica Rix
Paxson about this very,
very interesting book--
it reads like a novel--
called "Dead Mars, Dying Earth".
Stay with us.
You want to miss any of this.
[THEME MUSIC]
We're talking to John
Brandenburg and Monica Rix
Paxson about their book
"Dead Mars, Dying Earth".
And we ended our last segment
with some really sad things
that you were talking about,
that this global warming
is actually causing disease.
>> It's causing tropical
diseases to move north
into temperate regions.
Like New York City had an
outbreak of Nile encephalitis.
It was because a West
Nile mosquito suddenly
moved in to New York City.
Normally, a cold winter
would kill this mosquito
because it's used
to the tropics.
However, the winter
was too mild,
the mosquitoes are still around.
They've now appeared in
my home state of Virginia,
near Washington DC.
>> So this is no longer
something we can just look
at for the future?
>> No.
Here in Chicago, you lost
800 people in-- what is it--
three days to a
killer heat wave.
That is the face of global
warming we're going to see.
>> In '98, 5% of the world's
population were displaced from
their homes at one
period of time or another
because of climatic problems.
So it's really affecting us now.
We're just seeing the beginning.
As the carbon increases,
we'll continue
to see more unless we
turn this problem around.
>> You know, I think that
this is a very important book
because I think most
people, including myself,
think that this is
something that is way,
way out in the future and
we've got plenty of time to do
something about it.
But you're saying
the time is now.
>> Time is now.
>> What can we do?
What's the first thing
to be done, John?
>> Well, we proposed a 10-point
plan to start action now,
to change this course we are on.
The first thing we can do
is revive the fusion energy
program we had in this country.
We passed a fusion energy,
Magnetic Fusion Energy
Engineering Act in
1980, President Carter.
It was going to give us fusion
energy in 10 years, power
into the grid.
Fusion is a much
safer, cleaner form--
>> What is it?
>> Fusion is the nuclear process
that gives light to the stars
and the sun.
It is the process that
allows the universe
to have warmth and
light and life.
So it's a very
natural energy cycle.
>> And it's very different than
the kind of nuclear energy that
we're using now, which is unsafe
and produces long-term waste
that are extremely
hard to deal with.
So this is a much safer,
much more natural form
of nuclear energy, and one of
the keystones of our proposal.
We also are proposing that we
actually exchange debt or pay
rainforest nations
to produce trees.
Right now, they don't
have any incentive
to keep the rainforest intact.
These are poor people,
they need to farm,
they tear down the rainforest
in order to have farmland.
But if we actually generated
another motivation for them
to keep the rainforest
standing to plant trees
and maintain them, we
would be better off.
We have a number of other
solutions, many of which
your viewers can begin to
take action on right away.
One level is we need
to begin to demand
that our leadership lead us.
We need to tell our
leaders to lead us
in the instance
of global warming.
This is a planetary
problem we need leadership.
>> What's blocking it?
>> We have an opportunity right
now because this country has
had no energy policy since 1980
because of the oil glut that
occurred in the Middle East when
Iran and Iraq began their war
with each other.
So we didn't need to
think about energy.
It was just like turning
on water on the tap.
Now, we have an opportunity
with OPEC price increases
to actually address the problem
of energy and global warming.
We need appropriate
energy sources.
And if we can use solar and
wind to the maximum that we can
because those are available
right now, if we develop,
we reinvigorate, we revive
the 10-year program to harness
fusion power so we have cleaner,
safer energy in massive amounts
for the future and we
electrify the cars,
and we replant the rainforests,
then this great tragedy--
>> We can save the Earth.
>> Yes, we can.
>> Once you begin
to face a problem,
then all sorts of creative
resources become available
to solve it.
We've solved other
horrific problems here
on this planet, the dust bowl.
We've gotten a man on the moon.
We can solve this one too.
>> But what does the
ordinary person do here?
They're sitting there thinking,
"oh my god, this is terrible.
What can I do?"
>> Well, they make
choices all the time.
When they buy a
vehicle, they can
buy more fuel-efficient one.
When they buy an appliance, they
can look for fuel-efficiency
as part of the package.
They can also
insulate their homes,
begin to implement
solar energy if that's
a possibility for them.
Fuel cell driven
vehicles are coming
online in the next two
or three four years.
We can be receptive
to that as consumers
and buy the kinds
of things that are
going to produce less carbon.
But we can also
support an initiative
to end global warming
by asking our Congress
people to support the
passing of the Kyoto Accord.
>> What is that?
>> That is an international
effort to use a rational
and just approach to solving
the problem of global warming,
and it asks for countries
to reduce to a certain limit
the amount of carbon
that they're putting
into the atmosphere.
And it's not perfect
and nothing is perfect
but it is an equitable
and an initial step
that people can take right now.
As well as voting for the
kinds of representation
that we'll have that
treats global warming
as a serious problem.
>> What has stopped the process?
The glut of oil?
>> Yes, the glut of oil, but
also the fact that people think
they are helpless.
They don't think
they have options.
Part of what we tried
to do in this book
is help people face the problem
squarely without flinching,
but also face their
options squarely.
They have options they
don't know that they have.
Many people feel like the
choice is between an environment
or an economy.
And basically, that
isn't a choice.
What we have to do is
environmental policy
that helps the economy
continue to grow and provide
employment, not
only for ourselves
but the rest of the world.
We also need economic
policies, energy policies
that bring us more in
tune with the environment,
not fight against it.
>> The only frightening thing
here is that you talked about
the lack of oxygen now on the
air and the children who are--
so many more children have
asthma now than ever before.
>> There really is a
worldwide epidemic of asthma.
It's a bit of a mystery
why this is happening.
They do know that air
quality is one of the factors
and they've identified a number
of gases that are a problem.
Of course, oxygen is
going down on our planet.
We don't think that that's
directly a factor in asthma
because it's such a small part.
>> Real tiny, tiny.
>> Tiny part.
On the other hand,
this is one, it's
a red light going off
on your dashboard.
It's really the planet's way
of telling us that things
are trending in a bad way.
They are going in
a direction that we
need to take the car into
the shop and get it fixed
or will cause more serious
and permanent damage.
>> Well, for years, we've been
hearing about electric cars
and they show them
at auto shows.
>> Yes.
>> But nothing happens.
Why?
>> Well, they're expensive
and part of it is,
is until they can have
production lines that are
producing electric
cars all the time,
and people are buying
them all the time,
the cost will not come down.
Also, we have to develop
some infrastructures.
Fortunately, all of
our houses are already
wired for electricity.
The gas stations
could also convert
to supplying electricity
instead of gasoline.
But there's some
reorganization that we have to,
to make an electric
car friendly society.
>> It also is going
to be up to consumers.
When we discovered that
the SFCs were creating
a hole in the ozone layer,
there was a consumer movement
along with scientists to stop
buying aerosol spray cans.
So when consumers
begin to actually look
at what their vehicles
are costing them
in terms of the future
for their children
and begin to have alternatives
that are realistically
available to them, I think
people will do the right thing.
>> Well, I think especially
if they realize that these
problems are directly affecting
our generation, our children,
our grandchildren, and not some
future generation that let them
worry about it.
>> This isn't something that's
going to happen 100 years from
now.
This is something that's
happening right now.
We are going to see more
flooding, more hurricanes, more
tornadoes, more tropical
diseases, more droughts
as a result of global warming.
And this is something that will
affect our insurance rates,
it will affect our
economies, it will--
it is potentially
very catastrophic
for individuals and
certainly for a whole planet.
So everyone needs to know
that the choices that they
make, the people that they
vote for make a difference.
>> And they should be
asking these questions.
>> Yes.
>> Absolutely.
>> What are you going to
do about the environment?
>> By reducing our
dependence on foreign oil,
we'll increase our security
of our economy and also
our national security.
We don't want to have
to go to war again
over oil supplies that are
coming from across the ocean.
It would be much better
to have energy sources
here in this country supplying
most of our energy needs.
At the same time,
if we get a few--
more hurricane
Andrews in Florida
and the Gulf states
and the South Atlantic
states, this will have
disastrous consequences
for the economy.
Last hurricane season,
we had enormous category
5 storm, strongest storm they've
ever-- one of the strongest
storms we've ever seen
heading toward Florida.
Three million people
were evacuating,
they're moving along the
highway at three miles an hour
trying to escape this storm.
The storm was advancing
at 12 miles an hour.
By some miracle,
and a lot of people
must have been praying
because a cold front
arrived and deflected
the hurricane.
It hit North Carolina-- it
did a glancing blow in North
Carolina, but North Carolina
had two brushes with hurricanes
this last year, had
tremendous damage.
>> In about 30 seconds, can we
serve and can we say our Earth?
>> We absolutely can.
>> Yes.
>> We can absolutely pull
together and take the kind
of steps that are necessary
to solve this problem.
>> Well, I wish we had a lot
more time to talk about this
book because it's so
extensive and chilling.
I think it's such
an important book
and it's written
in such a manner
that people will read it
because it's like a novel.
Thanks very much.
We've been talking to John
Brandenburg and Monica Rix
Paxson who are experts on Mars
and science and the Earth.
Their book is "Dead
Mars, Dying Earth".
Don't miss it.
We bring you only the most
important new messengers
in publishing on this show.
These are authors
who care about you.
Keep coming back.
[THEME MUSIC]